docs: borg serve: recommend using a simple shell (closes #3818) (#8620)
borgbackup/borg: docs/usage/serve.rst

If you then run borg commands with ``--lock-wait 600``, this gives sufficient time for the borg serve processes to terminate after the SSH connection is torn down after the 300 second wait for the keepalives to fail.

You may, of course, modify the timeout values demonstrated above to values that suit your environment and use case.

> On a dedicated borg backup server, it is recommended to set the

Reviewer: Guess the **server** does not need to be "dedicated" for that, but the **user** should be dedicated to borg backups.

Author: Yes. I have reformulated the sentence. Now, the text does not mention a dedicated backup server, or a dedicated backup user. Rather, the text now refers to the consideration that the client is untrusted.

In this case, that the client is untrusted, using a simple shell implementation reduces the attack surface.

{As a personal note: i would recommend a dedicated backup server, and dedicated backup user, and always treat all clients as untrusted as much as possible. But all this is probably not a good fit for the borg documentation}

Reviewer: Good change, "untrusted client" is on-point.

backup user's shell to a simple implementation::

>   chsh -s /bin/sh BORGUSER

Reviewer: On debian, this links to dash.

Is `/bin/sh` pointing to a "simple shell" on all linux dists?

Author: I honestly do not have good expertise on this question, there are so many different distributions! I have reformulated the sentence such, that /bin/sh may not actually be such a simple implementation, even though it's used as an example.

For debian, i am confident when i say that dash is a simpler implementation than bash. And I am also confident to say, that other considerations being equal, a simpler software has the tendency to contain less security vulnerabilities than a more complex software.
However, in a specific comparison of two implementations, it is not really possible to guarantee that the simple implementation is a more secure choice than the complex impementation; Even a complex software can be maintained with rigour, and likewise a simple software can be neglected.

But, all things considered and even though i know of no actual security issue with using bash, given the choice, i would still give the general recommendation using dash over bash when configuring a dedicated backup user.

Because the configured shell is used by `openssh <https://www.openssh.com/>`_
to execute the command configured through the ``authorized_keys`` file
using ``"$SHELL" -c "$COMMAND"``,
setting a minimal shell implementation reduces the attack surface

> associated with a feature-rich complex code base.

Reviewer: It's not clear here how there can be an attack, considering `authorized_keys` is controlled by the server admin / hosting company, if users shall be forced to only run "borg serve".

In case of shellshock it worked via an environment variable content coming from the client side.

Author: So the theory goes like this:

openssh's sshd does all the checks, and then prepares to execute the command using the user's shell. This command is forced to a certain value through authorized_key's command= option. The ssh client still has certain powers over the environment variables.

As the user shell is a full program, it is theoretically possible that some feature or behaviour exists in the user shell that gives the client more control over what actions are performed on the backup server than was intended by the server admin.

While bash's shellshock vulnerability is indeed what i have in mind, i really did not attempt to produce any proof-of-concept that these earlier bash versions were actually exploitable in the context of a dedicated borg user with `borg serve` as forced ssh command. In any case, as fas as i know, current bash versions are not vulnerable to any environment manipulations that are possible by a ssh client in the scenario of a `command="borg serve",restrict ssh-rsa AAAAB3[..]` setup.

However, even though there is no actually exploitable current vulnerability known, i would still recommend to anyone who asks, that certain hardening is performed just-in-case.

In this regard, i think that the borg plays a role as i would assume that the documentation is used as a copy&paste source of server-configuration.
  If it is possible to present a copy&paste-able configuration that is preferential in some hypothetical cases but still does not impede all the features, then i would advocate for recommending it even though the scenario might never actually materialise.

Author: > It's not clear here how there can be an attack, considering `authorized_keys` is controlled by the server admin / hosting company, if users shall be forced to only run "borg serve".

PS: the technical nitpicking being, that the user is not forced to run "borg serve", but is forced to run the user shell with a specific forced argument. The user shell then decides whether (only) "borg serve" is run and no unintended side-effects happen.

If you then run borg commands with ``--lock-wait 600``, this gives sufficient time for the borg serve processes to terminate after the SSH connection is torn down after the 300 second wait for the keepalives to fail.

You may, of course, modify the timeout values demonstrated above to values that suit your environment and use case.

When the client is untrusted, it is a good idea to set the backup

> user's shell to a simple implementation (The example /bin/sh may or may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user's shell to a simple implementation (``/bin/sh`` is only an example and may or may
```
